
### Problem statement

Two tracks in a more general compute performance charter for LLK team:

Achieve maximal performance of the hardware (100% utilization) on general APIs

Develop fine tuned APIs that further improve performance for specific use cases required by downstream teams

#### Optimizing general performance

Currently guided by two numbers: current performance (from tracy) and theoretical performance (from napkin math) while in reality we are chasing a third hidden number, real performance achievable by our hardware.

Difference between real performance and theoretical performance is a gap in our overly simplistic mental model used for current perf calculations, that difference causes us to commit to or waste time on optimizations that might not be possible due to hidden variables not modeled in our current mental model, the goal of perf simulator is to provide a more complex model (but still quite simplistic) to improve our decision making accuracy and work prioritization.

Difference between current performance and real performance is a gap in our software implementation and a potential for improvement, since real performance is currently a hidden number we cant have quality information on our gap as we are currently using theoretical performance to asses that gap. Perf simulator is gonna give us higher quality information on that gap but not any indication where to focus our efforts on reducing it (since perf simulator is focussed on hardware capability and is _mostly_ unaware of our software implementation). To identify fine grained (in code) optimization targets a much more detailed look into the system is needed that takes our code fully into account, currently that model is our cycle accurate RTL simulator but its outputs are too noisy and complex for a software engineer to digest so another tool is proposed that is going to provide a much more streamlined view into fine grained performance of our hardware and software by post processing the wave generated by the RTL.

The final gap between numbers projected by the perf simulator and numbers achieved after optimization is expected as perf simulator is still abstracting some parts of our hardware and all inevitable inefficiencies in the code, the goal is not to make those numbers match (that would equate our perf sim and cycle accurate simulator which would be pointless) but to make them acceptably close. Acceptable tolerance is a tradeoff between development time and developer/operational efficiency.

#### Fine tune optimizations

Once we move into fine tune optimization step, a perf simulator is still useful as a quick way to explore the options for optimization of a particular case and making quick (slower than napkin math but also more accurate) assessments of the amount of realistic perf improvement possible.

Now that we explained the problem statement and rationale for implementing the aforementioned two tools, lets look at their high level implementation in more detail

### Unified reporting model

Since both tools are trying to lead us to the same number and convey the same information it is useful to and efficient for them to convey that information in a similarly structured way.

Proposed visualization also represents the abstraction level at which these tools are expected to operate and as such also represents what the author believes is an appropriate abstraction level.

If it is judged that a different abstraction level is needed the visualization will also need to be modified to account for that.

The currently decided abstraction level was chosen such that it accounts for some hardware features that are not easy for mental models to capture easily (with sufficient precision) while composing those features from building blocks that are easy to mentally model (while maintaining sufficient precision).

The one of the biggest such features are pipelined execution and complex overlapping of different operation (intra and inter API call), so visualization will model each of execution units and block of work they are doing along with their duration.

The result will be a pipeline swim lane diagram with time on the x axis and different execution units on y axis, like shown bellow.
Diagram generated from the wave via visualizer will have more detail due to its nature but the overall concept should remain the same, while simulator could provide additional annotations on what a stalled resource is waiting on.

### Perf simulator

Since most of the simulators job is going to be generating the visualization described above this section will mostly focus on how, as what any why have already been explained above.

Proposal is for simulator to be composed of the following parts:

Operation planner  
Block of work estimator  
Pipeline assembler  
Visualization generator

Operation planner’s job is converting a high level operation into multiple blocks of work according to the algorithm used in the current llk software or the optimization algorithm being explored.

Block of work is defined here as a sequence of instructions which execute in order on a particular exu and whose performance can easily be modeled.

Think converting a matmul_block into a sequence of unpacks matmuls and packs

Each block of work is then given to its estimator that decides how long that block would take to be executed

Once all blocks have been generated and timed pipeline assembler orders them on a timeline respecting which execution unit they belong to and taking care of dependencies between them.

For now most of the dependencies can be abstracted with a fifo of a particular length between connected execution units.

### Perf visualizer



